---
title: Lightweight Linux VMs on NixOS
tags:
  - chrono
---

Often I find myself needing a *pristine* Linux system for testing some program that is expected to work on a user's machine with an environment that is possibly quite different to mine. I could spin up a virtual machine, but that is too heavyweight. Alternatively, I could use Docker, but a Docker container is conceptually more of a process and less of a system. 

Enter [LXD](https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/introduction/), which advertises itself as offering a *"user experience similar to virtual machines but using Linux containers instead."* Or, as [u/Floppie7th](https://old.reddit.com/r/selfhosted/comments/b50h9t/docker_vs_lxd/) puts it, *"LXD makes 'pet' containers. Basically, VMs without the virtual hardware and extra kernel."* In other words, LXD allows us to spin up lightweight (Linux) VMs on a Linux machine, where one cares more about the separation of the userland than hardware or kernel.

## Installing lxd 

On NixOS, you can install LXD by adding `virtualisation.lxd.enable = true;` to your configuration.nix. You might also want to add yourself to the `lxd` user group so as to not have to use `sudo` when running the `lxc` command.

## Running an LXD container

Let us run a bare Ubuntu container to get started:

```
lxc launch ubuntu:18.04 pristine -c security.nesting=true
```

(Note that `security.nesting` flag is being enabled so that we may be able to install Nix later; you may leave it disabled if you would not be using Nix).

We named the container "pristine", and you check its status in `lxc list` (it should be in the RUNNING state).

## Entering the container 

This will drop us in the root shell:

```
lxc exec pristine -- /bin/bash
```

However, usually, it is better to create a user account (with sudo access) first, and then use it:

```
lxc exec pristine -- adduser --shell /bin/bash --ingroup sudo srid
```

Then you may directly log in as that user as follows:

```
lxc exec pristine -- su - srid -c 'tmux new-session -A -s main'
```

Note that we use `tmux` so that tty programs work.


## Installing Nix 

Assuming you have enabled the `security.nesting` flag on the container, you should now be able to install Nix by following [the official instructions](https://nixos.org/nix/).

I use Nix to develop and install my programs, so the above is all I need to do in order to begin testing them on a pristine Linux machine without much fanfare.

